I think we have been able to box in the more unfortunate elements of the right. That's probably a consequence, mostly, of moral deliberations undertaken after World War II. We seem to have come to a pretty general consensus, I would say, that claims of ethnic or racial superiority place you outside the realm of acceptable political discourse. That's the cliff place, where dialog inevitably degenerates into conflict. I think the classic errors of the right are to fail to attend sufficiently to the tendency for hierarchies to degenerate into corruption, because of wilful blindness and rigidity—and, of course, that's something that the left takes the right to task for, generally speaking. So there's the hard line, which is ethnic identity as a mark of superiority, and then there's a looser line, where there's also error. I think the right errs in the same way that the left does, when they play identity politics. Generally, the way we're conceptualizing the political landscape is right to left, as a distribution. But there's another axis, which is, probably, collectivist versus individualist. And there's collectivist left-wingers and there's collectivist right-wingers. Insofar as the left-wingers and the right-winger are collectivist, then they're wrong. You see that on the right, with their claims of ethnic and national superiority. I don't know. The thing is, there's a lot of noise in the press, especially as you move towards the radical left, about the alt-right. But I have a hard time putting my finger on who, exactly, these alt-right people are. If you look at the radical left, it's obvious that they have a stranglehold, I would say, on the universities, and especially the humanities and social sciences. One of the consequences of that is that the doctrine that those entities have been producing is spilling over into society, to a large degree. There's a lot of noise about the alt-right, but I can't figure out who the alt-right people are. Well, you know, what happens in the United States, I think, is that anything that smacks of support for Trump is immediately associated with the alt-right. But the situation in the United States is way more complicated than that. The Americans have been split 50 per cent Democrat and 50 per cent Republican—like, as close to 50 per cent as it can possibly be—for four decades. So I don't see that the election of Trump indicates the rise of something approximating, even, right-wing populism in the United States. It's more complicated in Europe, because the border and immigration issues are much hotter topics in Europe. It seems, to me, that there is a rise of ethno-nationalist parties on the farther reaches of the right. Yeah. But it's so difficult to get accurate information now, perversely enough, that it's very difficult to evaluate. Well, they were stunned at the fact that someone would pose that question. I sat there, and I thought about that for a long time, whether I would ask that question, because I knew I was jumping out of the game they were all playing. It's like, well, you have to live with these people. Do you really think that they're all so stupid? Is that really your theory about why Trump was elected? The whole Maher phenomenon is quite interesting, because he interviewed Ben Shapiro a while after that, and took everyone, including Shapiro, to task for the absolute stupidity of the catastrophe of Trump, without ever reflecting on the fact that clearly, in the United States, the liberal left lost the election. Trump didn't win. Everyone thought Hillary was going to win. She had it in the bag. She only needed 70,000 additional votes. If she wouldn't have played identity politics, she would have won. Maher, when he went after Shapiro, took no responsibility whatsoever for the failures of the liberal left. It was all, well, the stupidity of the people who voted for Trump. My sense—because I've talked to many, many people who voted for Trump—is that it isn't like people on the center right and the right, the Republican end of the distribution, were overwhelmingly impressed with what Trump had to offer. But that was the risk they were willing to take. It was partly because they were so disenfranchised by the identity politics that the Democrats have descended into. They have nothing else to offer, the Democrats. It's identity politics, or nothing. Well, I think it's very easy for people, who don't want to evaluate their own beliefs, to assume that everything the other side is saying is a consequence of their personal moral failings, and their ignorance, and their malevolence, basically. It's not helpful. I particularly think it's unhelpful in the United States, because it isn't obvious to me that the underlying dynamic has really changed that much, given that it's been 50-50 for 20 years, and it was 50-50 in the last election. Well, there is a danger on the right: the identity politics danger. The right will play identity politics different than the left. The leftist theory is, well, we should all segregate ourselves into our identity groups, and then those who are the oppressor groups should repent, and feel terrible for their oppressive acts, and step aside. That's one way of playing identity politics. Another way of playing identity politics is, to hell with you. I will pick my identity group, based on race or ethnicity, whatever it is that I feel most comfortable with, since that's the game, and then I'll play to win. My sense is that there will be plenty of people attracted to the identity politics games that you win. The people who have gone after me from the right wing have basically gone after me for exactly that reason. They say, Peterson stresses individuality and individual responsibility, but fails entirely to appreciate the fact that we do manifest ourselves in groups—which is exactly the same thing that the radical leftists argue—and, it's necessary for those of us who wish to preserve our culture, et cetera, to group together in our homogenous group, and act collectively to take our territory back. Something like that. That's very much a fascist perspective, fundamentally. But if the fundamental game is identity politics, it isn't obvious why the logical choice is to lose. When I discuss this, I tell people that the whole idea—that you should view the world through the lens that makes your collective identity paramount—is a pathology game, no matter who's playing it. It produces a reversion to divisive tribalism, and small, diverse tribes of people that mostly fight. Well, the IQ literature, in general, is an ethical nightmare. I think that the right-wingers, who are using IQ as a lever, use it to buttress claims of ethnic and group superiority. Of course, the possibility that that might occur is partly why the left has objected to, you could say, IQ research, since, well, probably for the last 30 years. It's interesting, because when the IQ tests were first developed, they were developed in France, and then they were used in England for years by left-leaning parties. This was part of a conscious plan to produce upward social mobility; the idea that you could objectively assess intellectual prowess: allow the selection of, let's call them deserving poor, using the Victorian or the Edwardian terminology, who were of great intellectual promise amongst the working class, and pull them up into the educated middle class, or elite, and that that would be of benefit to them and everyone else. The problem with IQ tests is that they do produce group differences, and that's unbelievably complicated and horrible. It's complicated because it isn't obvious how you should group people, if you're going to do group analysis of IQ. For example, there's more genetic diversity among Africans than there is among all the other human populations. So exactly how you put people in the bin of black, caucasian, and asian, let's say—which are generally regarded as the three major racial groups—is far from obvious. That's a basic scientific conundrum that's right at the bottom of the IQ problem. But if you use the typical groupings, you do get ethnic differences. That starts to become extremely problematic, because the question, then, is why? The answer to that is, we don't know. You think, well, the most commonly discussed ethnic difference is the propensity for people who are defined as black—the way that Americans define black—to perform more poorly on standardized tests. Then the accusation is that the tests are somehow biased, or that there's socioeconomic factors at work, or, perhaps, at the bottom of the desirability hierarchy, that there are biological factors at work. No one has nailed any of that down. If you give that data credence, then it leaves you with the terrible question of, what do you do about those differences? And how do you conceptualize them? It can also be used as a justification of a kind of racial hierarchy. But then, if you reverse it, you see the reverse problem emerging with the issue of Ashkenazi Jews, because they're overrepresented in most positions of competence, let's say, and authority—radically overrepresented, especially at the top. Unless you're willing to posit something like IQ differential that will account for it, you have to come up with a conspiratorial theory. This is the thing about IQ research: no matter how you interpret it, you're basically screwed. It's partly because the facts of the world don't necessarily line up with our a priori moral desires. One of the problems that I've been thinking about for a while—it's such an edge issue. I sort of fear it coming in, somehow, to a much more mainstream position, unless there's an attitude taken towards it. Obviously it seems that the left has been trying for a long time—and other people have—to keep it away. As you say, it's a bell curve, at least, and the time before that—just keep it away as a discussion. It's obviously bubbling away. So it seems, to me, that you have to find some attitude towards it. The fundamental problem is that the best predictor of long-term life outcome is IQ. That's a real problem. Now it's not that great a predictor. That's the first thing. If you're optimistic about IQ, you'd say that it predicts about 25 per cent in* the variants of long-term life outcome. Other factors, like conscientiousness, which is the next best predictor—it's a Big Five trait—accounts for about 9 per cent, 10 per cent. Something like that. So the two best predictors combined only account for 35 per cent of the difference in life outcome, leaving 65 per cent for other factors, which is quite a lot. So those factors could include things like prejudice and systemic bias, and so forth. But a lot of it's also luck, and health, and all the things that determine whether you fall off the edge of the world. The problem with IQ is that there's no damn way it's going away. People say, well, IQ is not really a good measure of intelligence. It's like, sorry, people. This is where it gets truly ugly. There is no phenomena in social sciences, period, that is on firmer statistical and conceptual footing than IQ. There's no phenomena that's more robust. If you give people a set of tests that assess abstraction, and then you measure their average score on the set of tests of abstraction, and then you rank order them, you have an IQ measured. That's all you have to do. The measure's no different than your average performance across a set of tasks that require abstraction. I think the problem, there, is not exactly so much the definition of intelligence as the only important, defining characteristic of human beings, but to conflate intelligence with value or moral virtue. Yes, worth. That's the really pernicious element. There's an underlying assumption that, if there are differences in people with regards to IQ, somehow, there are differences in their worth. There are differences in their economic worth, but that doesn't mean that there are differences in their intrinsic worth. That's something that has to be very, very carefully laid out. Right, right. OK, let's go into the IQ thing more terribly. IQ tests produce ethnic differences. You might say, well, that constitutes a sign of bias. It's like, OK, if that was true, then IQ tests, when you're using them to predict real-life performance within groups, they would under-predict the real-life performance of ethnic groups where IQ scores are lower. But they don't. There's no evidence of bias in terms of prediction. Now you could say, well, that means the whole system is rigged. The IQ system is rigged, and the life outcome system is rigged. That would be, basically, the position of the egalitarian left. It's like, fair enough. That could be the case. But there's another ugly thing that lurks here, too. Let's say that you decide that the way you're going to deal with the fact that there's ethnic differences in IQ, in the literature, is that you're going to throw IQ out completely, and not bother with it. Some universities are starting to do this, because they're throwing away tests like the SAT. People say that these standardized tests aren't IQ tests, but that's because they don't know what the hell they're talking about, because they're absolutely and clearly IQ tests. Any test that tests a reasonable set of questions of abstraction that you get a total score from, or an average, is an IQ test. So people can wave their hands about that all they want, but that just means they don't know what the hell they're talking about. So let's say we decided to just scrap the idea of IQ. Well, here's a problem. This is actually a problem Charles Murray and Herrnstein talked about in The Bell Curve. It was never really mentioned, though. It's actually an argument that the left should be very sensitive to. Our hierarchies are increasingly IQ predicated. And so what's happening is that the left is going to miss what's going to dispossess most people—that they are, hypothetically, concerned about—over the next 30 or 40 years. We're producing a cognitive hierarchy, and, increasingly, the spoils of the hierarchy are going to people who are in the cognitive stratosphere, so to speak. It's one thing to be really smart. It gives you an edge in a complex society, especially one that's changing very rapidly, like ours. But if you're really smart, and you know how to use a computer? You are so far ahead of people that it's like you're a member of a different species. If you don't think that's going to be the fundamental problem of the coming age, let's say, then you're not very awake. I think that's a genuine concern. There's going to be elements of it that are going to come at us in an unreasonable way. Look at what's happened at Harvard. I mean, one of the things that's happened there—and the Asians, of course, are the wildcard in this whole enterprise. The affirmative action policies in the U. S. were hypothetical set up, at least in part, to bring so-called minority—it's not like Asians are a minority, but to bring minority people up. Sure. But it turns out that, if you use an unbiased selection process, then you over-select for Asians. You over-select for Asians and Jews. It's like, oh, my God!Personality. The funny thing, too, is that it's not that they're downgrading them on personality, because they don't use objective personality measures, which they could use. One of the things that's really cool about the Big Five, especially measures of conscientiousness—measures of conscientiousness do not produce ethnic differences. One of the ways of putting together a selection battery that's objective, let's say—which would mean both blind to peripheral characteristics such as race, but also capable of predicting the desired outcomes—is to produce a battery of tests that blends cognitive assessment with genuine personality assessment. Actually, it's so interesting, because in the American context, you're actually bound to do that by law. If you're selecting employees, you're bound to use the most valid and reliable current method of selection. That's instantiated into law. The American psychological association has stated firmly that the proper way to do that is to use a balance of cognitive tests and personality tests. But virtually no one does that, for all sorts of extremely complicated and absurd reasons. Now, then you might say, well, we can't use the cognitive tests, because they produce ethnic differences—and you can moderate that by interleaving personality, which is one way of dealing with it—We're going to use something else. Well, it turns out that whatever else you use is more biased than the thing you're fleeing from. That's what's manifesting itself at Harvard. Well, we'll use our subjective judgement. You know, the Harvard people have been hand waving about the fact that their bloody admission criteria are so sophisticated that you can't capture them with mere quantitative analysis. We're so sophisticated that we couldn't possibly quantify it. It's like, that's not sophisticated: that's prejudice. So what's happening is that wherever subjectivity is allowed to enter into the equation, the Asians are downgraded as a consequence of personality, which isn't personality. It's actually the subjective sense that the evaluators produce, when they read through the applications, and they know that the applicant is Asian. There's a variety of things that are appalling about that. One of them, of course, is the denial of the opportunity to attend a top-tier university like Harvard, for the students who were qualified to attend; the Asian students. But there's another element to this that's also, equally, pernicious, and, in some sense, more self-serving. If you set up your society properly—and this is the equality of opportunity doctrine—it's in everyone's best interest to exploit the talented maximally, right? In every domain of productive endeavour, a small proportion of people do most of the productive work. And so you want to take advantage of those people, those 1 in 1,000 people, or 1 in 10,000 people, who are mathematically gifted, for example, or gifted in whatever way they happen to be gifted. So if you don't select your top-tier candidate—so let's say the Asian students, in the case of Harvard—then society doesn't get a chance to exploit them properly, and everyone ends up poorer. Apart from the fact that each individual doesn't get their opportunity, there's a social cost, too, that is not trivial. Of course, the other issue is that the criteria are seen to be inequitable, because they actually are. That produces a terrible amount of cynicism about the institutions themselves. The horror of objective testing is that it's biased. The more profound horror is that, no matter what you replace it with, you replace it with something that's even more biased. So it's like, well, good luck thinking your way out of that conundrum. Oh, yeah. That was a question that went nowhere. It's a crucial question. It's absolutely crucial. Yeah. It's a question that intellectuals—in particular, I would say—are at terrible fault for not addressing over the last, virtually, 100 years. The intellectuals, roughly speaking, have been complicit in failure to define the excesses of the left. Well, I think it's partly because intellectuals tend to be left leaning. The best predictor for leaning left is a trait called openness, which is associated, to some degree, with cognitive ability, but more importantly with creativity. Left-leaning people don't like boundaries between things, which is also why I think the left-leaning people can't draw boundaries within their own domain. They don't like borders, as we can certainly tell. They'd rather have the borders open. Why? Because the more open the borders are between things, the more opportunity there is for information flow. Left-leaning open people like information flow. They think, well, the net benefit of free information flow is positive. It's like, fair enough. But that doesn't mean that there should be no barriers between things, which is the conservative perspective. It's not only information that flows across open borders. All sorts of things flow across open borders. Things get muddy and confused, if there's no conceptual differences between people. So there's an argument between the right and the left about where the borders should be, and how porous they should be. That's an argument that always has to occur. The problem on the left is that clearly, clearly, absolutely, indisputably, if the right can go too far—and the evidence for that is the catastrophe of Auschwitz, the catastrophe of the Nazis. All that death and suffering is evidence of wrong, which is accepted by the left—then equal evidence exists that that can happen on the left. In fact, perhaps even more evidence. If you don't think the evidence is credible, then there's something wrong with you. Yeah. Never. Never. And not in the education systems either. No one knows about it. The first time my students at the University of Toronto hear about what happened in the Soviet Union is in my personality class. It's like, what the hell? First of all, really? In a personality class? The reason I bring it up is because Solzhenitsyn drew an existential link between the failure of the individual psyche and the propensity for people to engage in the great lie, and the creation of these totalitarian states. So I view it as an extension of existential psychology and philosophy. That's how I slot it into my classes. But the students otherwise don't know. It's like, oh, really? We had 100 million corpses pile up, and damn near put the entire planet to the torch, because of the tension between the West and the radical left. We're just going to sweep that under the rug, like that never happened? It's very easy to be extremely annoyed about this, and even morally outraged. It's hard to avoid the temptation, but there is, actually, a technical problem here. It's one that the right is, perhaps, just as incapable of solving. This is the issue that you brought up. It's like, OK, exactly when do things go too far on the left? The answer is, we don't know. It might be because there isn't a single issue on the left that marks out the degeneration into pathological ideology, like claims of racial difference that support the notion of superiority do on the right. Maybe it's a pathological combination of five good ideas. Something like that. I believe, now, that there's a nexus of ideas that mark out the left as too extreme: diversity, inclusivity, equity, white privilege—that's not a phrase I'm very fond of—and exaggerated claims of systemic racism. It's kind of like a mantra. It's something like that, as well as the verbiage around the oppressive patriarchy. Jesus, you know? That's a complicated box. There's an interaction between all those terms. You can make a case for diversity. Should all elementary school teachers be women? Well, perhaps not. Should all nurses be women? Perhaps not. Should all plumbers be men? Well, perhaps not. Well, yes. And if we're going to have a society where men and women are competing on a roughly equal basis, do we want a situation where all the engineers are men? Perhaps not. I mean, I don't know the answer to these questions, because choice matters. So each of these individual leftist propositions has a domain of reasonableness about it, and then it goes too far. And then the aggregation of them also goes too far, but we can't tell when. Yeah. Well, there's a universalism about the communist ethos that definitely isn't there on the Nazi side. The Nazi claim is, this is for us, and definitely not for you. The exclusionary principle is built right into it, right at the beginning, whereas on the communist side, at least in principle, if not in reality, the coming utopia was for everyone. There was the song of the brotherhood of man, and the idea that people could be included regardless of their origin. That seems like part of it. There's an evil built into the principle itself that the Nazis ran with, that is absent with the communists. But the truth of the matter is, to some degree, that it didn't matter, because the tally of bodies was equivalent on both sides of the equation. So even if there is a lack of a certain toxic principle at the outset of the communist doctrine, it doesn't make it one wit less catastrophic. It might even be worse, in some sense, because you can't put your finger on it. My sense is that a line crossed on the left is equality of outcome. It's part of the identity politics pathology. First of all, there's something wrong with construing the world as if your group identity is paramount. That's bad. That's a nonstarter. It's not so easy to exactly say why. Oh, definitely. There's just no reason for the right not to capitalize on that. Well, as soon as you say, yes, your group identity is paramount, then you allow people, who say, well, not only is it paramount; it's superior. Well, that's not that much of a transformation of the perspective, especially when you're also saying, to certain groups, that you should be playing to lose. Anyone sensible is going to look at that, and say, well, why shouldn't I play to win? If group identity is paramount, why shouldn't my group just win?In London, where we're sitting, last week, on a morning television chat show, a young woman who was invited on got into a row with the presenter. Because he supported Trump, and she was anti-Trump, he said, well, since you loved Obama so much… I didn't love Obama, she says. I'm a communist. I didn't love Obama. I'm literally a communist, you idiot. This, as we speak, has become not just enormously popular, but giggle-some on the left, in this country. I'm not talking about the far left. I'm talking about the left, right up to and involved with Her Majesty's opposition. I'm literally a communist has just been made into a t-shirt by a group on the left, and they're selling it—this in an era when we've been endlessly told, the only thing you do, if you see a fascist, is to punch them in the face. There seems to be—as I've always said—a supply and demand problem with fascists: there aren't enough for the demand there seems to be, to find them. But yet, here you have, live on television, I'm literally a communist. It's unimaginable. We all know it's unimaginable that someone would say, I'm literally a fascist on TV, and everyone would find it wonderful, and everyone would make a I'm literally a fascist t-shirt. So this 20th century error, this educational error, seems, to me, to be having real-world consequences. It's a catastrophe. It means that we learn half the lesson. We sort of learned half the lesson of the 20th century, right? And thank God we sort of learned half the lesson. But the other half has not been learned, and that's not acceptable, not in the least. The data in the United States indicates that 1 out of 5 social science professors are self-proclaimed Marxists. It's like, you're a Marxist? Really? Seriously, you're a Marxist? It's like, yeah, and not only am I a Marxist, it's one of the things that makes me morally virtuous. Well, what about the 20th century? Well, that wasn't real communism. I know what that means. It's the most arrogant possible statement. What it means is, you know those people who tried it before? They didn't really have the same nuanced understanding of the sophistication of Karl Marx's revelation that I have, or the moral character that I have. If I had been placed in charge of the Russian Revolution—the utopia? That was only a couple of decades away. That's what it means. Always one more murder away from utopia. Well, and the way that the leftists defend themselves is by saying things, like, well, what about all the deaths caused by capitalism? You're not factoring them into the equation. Of course, the problem, there, is that most systems manifest themselves in various forms of bloody excess. And so how you tally up the bodies depends on where you draw the boundaries around your conceptual systems. If you include the entire history of the Western expansion into the New World, say, over the last 400 years, and you decide that's a manifestation of Western capitalism, then, well, the tallies, I suppose, look different. I think there's something crucial about that. One of the things that we will have to contend with is something like that, which is that every system is, in some sense, a system of oppression and bloodshed. But some of them also produce a modicum of wealth and happiness. I would say that's the proper defence of what has been established, as a consequence of the primacy of the individual in the conceptual schemes of the West: our bloody oppressive system, at least, produces some modicum of wealth and wellbeing, whereas the communist system produced, if you're an optimistic communist, no more deaths—which I believe is wrong—but zero wealth, and a tremendous amount of collateral destruction. It could easily be that we're in a position where all we have to choose from is horrible systems, some of which do some things right, now and then. That would be our system. That would be the Western system. I think there's plenty of evidence for that—accruing evidence. What's happening right now across the world is that, as the idea of individual sovereignty, and associated property rights, and freedom of choice, and so forth, are increasingly instantiated in developing countries, those countries are moving away from conditions of abysmal poverty at a staggering rate. The right-wing types have to admit that hierarchies do dispossess, and that they have their elements of brutality about them. Even if they're functional hierarchies, even if they're competence predicated, they dispossess people. This is the cognitive problem, in large part. It's going to bedevil us over the next 20 years. I mean, at least there are fewer people starving now. There are more people being lifted out of absolute poverty. Child mortality rates in Africa, now, match those in Europe in 1950. That's cause for celebration. We have halved the number of people in absolute poverty since the beginning of the millennium. So I think we have to grow up, and be realistic, and say, well, yes: all human systems of governance and organization are pathological, to some degree. But some of them are minimally functional, as well. Well, I think you don't want to underestimate the role that technological transformation has played in this. I've been thinking about YouTube and podcasts quite intensely for about two years. I started putting my university lectures on YouTube in 2013. I did that for a variety of reasons—mostly curiosity and the drive to learn. I've found that, if I want to learn a technology, the best way to do it is to use it. I'm always learning new technologies—not that that makes me particularly unique—and I had some success with my lectures on public television in Canada. I did some lectures with this series called Big Ideas on Canadian public television. There's about 200 of those lectures, and I did five of them. Two hundred done by 200 different people, but I did five of them, and they were regularly in the top 10 of the most viewed lectures. So I knew there was some broader market for, let's say, ideas. I thought, well, I might as well put my lectures up on YouTube, and see what happens. And then, by April of 2016, I had a million views. I thought, huh. The only reason people are watching these is because they want to watch them, because they're actually really hard. A million of something is a lot. If you sell a million copies of your book—well, first of all, that never happens, right? It's very, very rare. You never have your scientific papers cited a million times. You rarely have a million dollars. It's a very large number. Well, fair enough. It's, of course, not as uncommon as it once was, but it's still a significant number, and I didn't really have any way of calibrating that. I thought, well, what am I supposed to do, now that I hit a million views? How am I supposed to conceptualize that? What is this YouTube thing anyways, that was once a repository for cute cat videos? What does it mean to have a million views on it? So I really started to think about it, because there were a lot of people commentating, as well, and they were into the lectures and following them avidly. I thought, OK, so what is this YouTube, exactly? I thought, well, for the first time in human history, the spoken word has the same reach as the written word. And not only that: no lagged publication and no barrier to entry. That's a major technological revolution. That's a Gutenberg revolution. That's a big deal. This is a game changer. It was soon after that that I discovered the podcast world, which is about 10 times as big as the YouTube world. The podcast world is also a Gutenberg revolution, except it's even more extensive. The problem with books and videos is that you can't do anything else while you're doing them, right? When you're reading, you're reading. When you're watching a video, you can be distracted, but you have to pay attention to the video. But, if you're listening to a podcast, you can be driving a forklift or a long haul trunk, or you can be exercising or doing the dishes. And so what that means is that podcasts free up, say, two hours a day, for people to engage in education activities that they wouldn't otherwise be able to engage in, and that's about one-eight of people's lives. So podcasts hand people one-eighth of their life back, to engage in high-level education. I thought, well, people actually want to do this. There's a massive market for high-level intellectual engagement, that's much deeper and more desperate, let's say, than anyone suspected. We really saw that in Vancouver. I mean, the discussion I had with Sam Harris, the two discussions—we talked about the relationship between facts and values, and science and religion more peripherally. But the dialog was conducted approximately at the level, I would say, of a pretty rigorous PhD defense. We were only suppose to talk for an hour and go to Q&A, but the crowd didn't want us to stop, so we talked, the first night, for two and a half hours, and the second night for two and a half hours. The crowd was 100 per cent on board the entire time. It wasn't because Sam was winning or I was winning. Neither of us, in fact, were trying to win: we were trying to learn something, and we were actually trying to learn something. We weren't just pretending to do that. The place erupted at the end, and I think one of the things I've realized in the last couple of days, as I've been thinking this through, is the narrow bandwidth of TV has made us think we're stupider than we are. People have a real hunger for deep intellectual dialog, and that can be met with these new technologies. That has revolutionary significance, and that's starting to unfold. Yeah. I'm trying to… Well, I spent 15 years writing the first book I wrote, which is called Maps of Meaning. It's akin to 12 Rules for Life, although it's a much more difficult book. The audio version of that book is out now, by the way. It's been out since June 12th. If you liked 12 Rules or you were interested in it, you could try that. I think the audio version is much more accessible, because it's a difficult book. Getting the cadences of the sentences right is an aid to comprehension. I spent 15 years writing that book, about three hours a day writing, and a lot more time reading. I was interested in solving a problem. I was interested in the great atrocities of the 20th century: the ones that were committed on the right and the ones that were committed on the left. But I was interested in it psychologically. What that means was, had I been there, what could have I done to not participate? So that's what I've been trying to figure out; because, for me, what happened in Nazi Germany, and what happened in the Gulag Archipelago, and in Maoist China—many places—was a sufficient definition of hell—convincing, as well. I wanted to understand what the opposite of that was, and not sociologically or politically or economically, because I think that, in the final analysis, those levels of explanation are insufficient. But psychologically, how is it that you must conduct yourself in the world, so that if the opportunity to participate in such things arises, you won't?When the holocaust museums went up, there was a motto that went up along with them, which was, never forget. I thought, yeah, fair enough. But you can't remember what you don't understand. So I wanted to understand it. When people read history, they either read it as detached observer, or they tend to read it as, well, maybe, the heroic protagonist. People like to imagine that they would be Schindler in Schindler's List, but that's wrong. The probability that you'll be the perpetrator is much higher, especially merely the perpetrator that's ensconced in silence, when silence is not the appropriate thing. So I wanted to, having figured out what constituted hell and the pathway to that—which would be, I suppose, the cowardice and resentment that produces either complicitness in those events or failure to oppose them when they emerge. I wanted to understand what the opposite of that was, because I think that's what needs to be learned from what happened in the 20th century. I wrote Maps of Meaning to understand that, and to lay out what the opposite was. That turned out to be extremely helpful, to me, and then to the people I started to teach about that, because it's useful to know what the opposite of hell is. I've been teaching those things to people since 1993, so that's 25 years. The response from the students has always been the same sort of response I'm getting now, absent some of the negative characterizations, let's say, which have emerged for particular reasons. But these students have always said one of two things, and this is the vast majority of them. This isn't cherry-picked responses: it's been the same everywhere. And this is the same response I get from my audiences now, too. They say, you've given me words to explain and understand things that I always knew to be true, or, I was in a very dark place for one of the seven reasons that people might be in a dark place—alcohol or drugs or failure of relationships or lack of vision or nihilism or hopelessness or depression or anxiety, or all of the pitfalls that people can encounter— and I've been developing a vision for my life, and trying to adopt responsibility, and trying to be careful with what I say, and things are way better. That's what drives me. It's so interesting, watching what's happening, because, you know, you said, I'm the most loathed and the most loved man. It's like, I'm loathed by a very small percentage of very noisy people, and they are people who either don't or haven't or won't take a look at what I'm doing, partly because it doesn't fit within their conceptual scheme. Whenever I'm interviewed by journalists that have the scent of blood in their nose, let's say, they're very willing and able to characterize the situation I find myself in as political, but that's because they can't see the world in any other manner than political. The political is a tiny fraction of the world, and what I'm doing isn't political: it's psychological, or philosophical, or theological. The political element is peripheral. If people come to the live lectures, let's say, that's absolutely self-evident. That's not what they're about; that's not why people are there; that isn't what they talk to me about afterwards. It's fundamentally irrelevant. The only reason this ever became political is because, in Canada, our provincial and federal governments had the unspeakable arrogance to propose compelled speech legislation in a British common law system, where that had never been done, ever, even once, and despite the fact that your Supreme Court in 1942 made such things unconstitutional. It's accurate but partial. There were provincial laws that were already in place to compel this sort of thing, but a federal law had been generated. I went and read the policy guidelines within which the federal law was to be interpreted. Those were produced by the Ontario Human Rights Commission, which is a radical leftist inquisition, fundamentally. They had documented out a very large number of policies that would make anyone sensible's hair stand on end—if they read them, which they didn't. But I did, and not only did I read them, I understood them; and, having read them and understood them, I made videos. One night, I got up at about three in the morning, because it was really bothering me, for a variety of complicated reasons, including the fact that a number of my clinical clients had been bullied into a state of ill mental health, by radical social justice warriors, at their various work places. This was long before I was embroiled in any of this controversy, by the way, so it wasn't a sampling bias. At the same time, my university had the unmitigated gall to mandate unconscious bias retraining for their human resources staff, despite the fact that unconscious bias measurements are not reliable or valid, even by the testimony of their formulators, and despite the evidence that there is no data whatsoever lending unconscious bias retraining even the vaguest shred of credible outcome. So these videos—because I was annoyed about this, and I thought, what will happen if I make a video? Well, it would depend on the student, and the context, and why I thought they were asking me, and what I believed their demand actually characterized, and all of that. Because that can be done in a way that's genuine and acceptable, and in a way that's manipulative and unacceptable. If it was genuine and acceptable, then I'd have no problem with it; and if it was manipulative and unacceptable, then not a chance. You might think, well, who am I to judge? Well, first of all, I am a clinical psychologist, and I've talked to people for about 25,000 hours, and I'm responsible for judging how I'm going to use my words. I judge it the same way I judge all the interactions I have with people, which is to the best of my ability and characterized by all the errors that I'm prone to. So, you know, I'm not saying that my judgment would be unerring, but I have to live with the consequences. I'm willing to accept the responsibility. But, also, to be clear about this, that never happened: I never refused to call anyone by anything that they had asked me to call them by. Although that's been reported multiple times, it's a complete falsehood, and it had nothing to do with the transgender issue, as far as I was concerned. Besides that, if it had only to do with the transgender issue in Canada, the probability that this would have had the impact that it had is zero. It wasn't about that at all. It was about something far deeper and far more insidious, and everyone knew it, which was why it didn't go away. What should have happened is there should have been some controversy around it—maybe even a protest—and everyone's attention should have gone away, like, a week later. That didn't happen even a little bit. As I knew, there's far more going on, here, than this little bill would have revealed. Be precise in your speech. You got it right. Yeah, you got the gist of it. That's the crucial thing. Well, I mean, about 25 years ago, 30 years ago, maybe. 1985… I guess that's… How far along ago is that… It's a long time. Yeah. I decided that I was going to be very careful with what I said. When I was thinking through some of these ideas that I already described, trying to understand what tilted people towards vengefulness and cruelty, I was contemplating that personally: what would tilt me towards that? or what did tilt me towards that? At the same time, I developed an acute awareness of my speech. I asked a question, and when you ask yourself a question, and you really ask a question, you start thinking of the answer, whether you want to think it up or not. And the answer that you might generate might bear very little resemblance that you would like to generate. I had asked myself a question, which was, what's the pathway out of this hell? let's say, and how might I be tangled up in that? One of the things I started to realize was that I wasn't very careful with what I said. That seemed, in some way, to be related to that. It's not surprising, because it's not really obvious that the Nazis, for example, were all that careful about what they said, in terms of its relationship to the truth. Quite the contrary, and the same with the ideologs in the Soviet Union—so the idea that there was some relationship between carelessness in speech, lies and deception, and that sort of thing, or self-aggrandizement, or any of the things you can indulge in, if you're careless with your speech, and the weakening of our character to the point where you might get tangled up in great and terrible sociological movements. That seemed, to me, to be reasonable—and many people have commented on that, like Solzhenitsyn, for example. So I started to experience discomfort with what I was saying. What seemed to happen was that I started to realize, and could feel it—I was reading Carl Rogers at the same time, and he actually suggested that psychotherapists pay attention to exactly this sort of thing. I started to understand that many of the things I was saying weren't true. I didn't really believe them; they weren't really my thoughts; they made me feel weak, when I said them. That's a good question. Can I give you an example… Oh, maybe I would engage in an argument with someone at a bar on an intellectual issue, for the purpose of displaying my intellectual superiority—or, at least, hypothetically displaying it, you know? Sometimes people like to argue, and they like to argue because, hypothetically, they would like to win. Oh, sure. I was doing that, definitely. Oh, yes. All the time. And sometimes they weren't even platitudes, you know? They might have been things I picked up in books, that weren't cliches. But they weren't mine. I didn't have any right to them. Just because you read something, doesn't mean you have a right to it. You have to understand it, and understanding something that's deep means a deep transformation. It means you have to live it. So just because you know a philosophical concept and you can say it, doesn't give you the right to utter it, as if it's yours. You have to earn that. I was a smart kid, and my head was full of ideas that I hadn't earned. I could lay them out, but that doesn't mean that they were mine or me. There was a falsity in expressing them. I couldn't tell, for a while, because I would say things, and part of me would be all critical about what I was saying: you don't believe that; that's not accurate; it's kind of a lie. It was saying that to almost everything I said. I took a risk: I thought, OK, I'm going to assume that the part of me that's critical about what I'm saying is right, even though that was terrible, because, often, it meant I could hardly speak. And then I learned to only say things that didn't make me feel weak; and then I decided that that's what I was going to do. So I've been careful with what I've been saying, for a long time. Well, what you're misunderstanding, in part, is—how do you know the things that you're saying aren't true? I would say, one of the ways you know is they weaken you, and you can learn that. You can learn to feel that. Carl Rogers talked about this a lot in his work of psychotherapy. He said that one of the primary roles of a psychotherapist is to be congruent, and what he meant by that was that there was no disjunction between what you felt in a situation, let's say, and what you said—that it was all one piece. That was an embodied unity, not merely a conceptual unity. So I really do think that there's something to it. I mean psychologically weak. I mean morally weak. I mean weak in character. That sort of thing. So I got very careful with what I said, and, at the same time, I was spending a tremendous amount of time writing. I was very careful with what I wrote. So, in Maps of Meaning, I think I rewrote every sentence in that book at least fifty times. Oh, yeah. That's for sure. I would take a sentence out and write a bunch of variants of it, and then I would pick the variant that was best, and then I'd try to come up with all the arguments I could about why the sentence was stupid and wrong. Yeah. I still do this when I'm writing. I said fifty. It was more like 15, with 12 Rules for Life, so it was less. But I'm a better writer than I was, then, so I didn't have to do it quite as often. I kept writing it, until I couldn't make the sentences any better. That doesn't mean they were good: it just meant I got to the point where, if I was rewriting them, it wasn't obvious the rewriting was better than the original sentence. So then I had to stop. Well, it's made me evermore careful. It's exaggerated the care. But I had been quite careful, and the evidence for that is quite clear. When all of this political controversy around me, and that swirled around me—well, it still is. Maybe it's even exaggerated, to some degree. But it was very intense, in Canada, for a good six months, and people were going over what I had put on YouTube, with a fine-toothed comb. There was 200 hours of videos, there. And you think, well, with some creative editing, and with motivation and mind, you'd think, if you went over 200 hours of someone's lectures, you could find a smoking pistol, even if you had to chop out a sentence. No one found anything, and the reason for that was—there wasn't anything there. That's why they didn't find anything. So I had already been very careful, and I had discussed all sorts of unbelievably contentious issues. My classes were very intense. The Maps of Meaning class, in particular… Its basic presupposition—partly what I was trying to do with my students was convince them that, had they been in Nazi Germany in the 1930s, they wouldn't have been on the side of the good. That's a hell of a thing to drag people through, but it's, statistically, overwhelmingly likely. So it's a very serious class, and certainly a place where you could step badly at any given moment. I talked about gender differences, and the biological substructure of consciousness, and all these things that could easily become politically contentious. But, as I said, there weren't any smoking pistols. But now, for the last two years, I've been more careful—and I have people watching me. My family watches me and what I'm doing. They keep very careful track of it, and if I deviate a little bit from how I should have behaved, then they tell me—and I have friends who are doing the same thing—and I listen to them. No. Not a bit, and I'll tell you why. It's really complicated, you know? I have this friend, who's a native carver. He comes from a very rough background—like, way rougher than you think. Maybe some of you have come from rough backgrounds, or you know people who have come from them, but he comes from a plenty rough background. I started working with him, buying his art, 15 years ago. He was a survivor of residential schools in Canada. We got pretty close. He helped me design the third floor of my house. Anyways, the long and short of it was that I got inducted into his family, about a year and a half ago, in this big ceremony up in a native reservation, in northern Vancouver. We've been through a lot together, and a lot of it's been pretty rough. This whatever the hell his name was, Mishrash, or whatever the hell his name was, had the temerity to say that I was romancing the noble savage. It's like, watch your step, buddy. You don't know what the hell you're talking about, not even a bit. Had I been a left-leaning personage, and he had made a comment like that, there would have been hell to pay—which isn't to say that I'm a right-leaning personage, by the way. So I don't regret it a bit. I think what he said was absolutely reprehensible, and that he should have been called out on it. So I don't regret it at all. Now, people said, maybe it would have been better for me not to have made that comment. It's possible that they're right, but I actually thought about it, and I thought, there's no excuse for that. You don't know what you're talking about. You're meddling with things you don't understand, and you're making a casual aspersion not only on me, but on my ‘noble savage' friend. Yeah—no. No, they compared me to Hitler or Milo Yiannopoulos. It's important, and the reason it's important is because…First of all, they said playing a clip of Jordan Peterson was like playing a clip of Hitler or Milo Yiannopoulos. I thought, well, let's go a little easy on the Hitler comparisons, there, guys. You might want to save that for when it's really necessary, because you don't use… It's sacrilegious to use an insult like that, except in situations where it's justified. It's not appropriate to use a catastrophe like that casually, especially when you're doing it under the guise of moral virtue. There's no excuse for it. And then the second thing is, you're a professor, both of you. Which is it? Am I Hitler, or am I Milo Yiannopoulos? Seriously. Those are not the same people, in case you didn't notice. One was the worst barbarian in the 20th century, with the possible exception of Stalin and Mao, and the other one is a provocateur trickster, who's quite quick on his feet, and is… what would you say… stirring things up in a relatively non-problematic way. They're not the same creature. So to combine them in a single, careless insult during an administrative investigation—which was entirely unwarranted, by the way, and was predicated on an absolute lie: there hadn't been a student complaint, as the university admitted. There's no excuse for that, and, if they weren't professors, it wouldn't have been so bad. But they were. The reason I sued them—there's a whole bunch of reasons. The Hitler comparison and the Milo Yiannopoulos comparison were only two of about 40 things that they tarred me with, and they're all listed in the deposition. The only reason I brought the lawsuit forward—what, seven months later; something like that—was because of what happened with Lindsay Shepherd. What happened to her at Wilfrid Laurier is absolutely inexcusable. Everything they did to her was predicated on a lie. Then the university apologized, and so did the professor. And then he lied during his apology, which was a forced apology anyways, and therefore of very little utility. They were subject to no disciplinary action, even though the statutes of the university required it, and they made Lindsay Shepherd's life a living hell, even after they apologized to her and told her that she did nothing wrong, and that they hadn't followed their own procedures. I read her deposition, and I actually read it on YouTube, where it's got about 500,000 views, by the way. I thought, you people haven't learned anything. You've learned absolutely nothing. And so, if one lawsuit doesn't convince you, maybe two will. And so then, with regards to free speech: free speech is still bounded inside the structure of law, and these people broke the law—or, at least, that's my claim. So I don't see the contradiction, there, at all. You can't just slander someone, defame them, lie about them. You can't incite people to crime. There's all sorts of reasonable restrictions on free speech that are already codified, essentially, in the British common law system. Wilfrid Laurier learned nothing, but this isn't over yet. Well, I do see it that way, which is why I spent seven months thinking about it, before I decided to do it. But I thought that there's always risk, in every decision: there's the risk of doing something, and there's the risk of not doing something. Both of those risks are usually catastrophic, in every decision you make in life. I weighed up the risks, and I thought, nope. The risk, here, of not doing something is greater than the risk of doing something. Had they shown any sign—look, one of the things that Wilfrid Laurier did in the aftermath of this scandal, which, by the way, was the biggest scandal that ever hit a Canadian university by a large margin. It was an international scandal. I rarely go places where people haven't heard about this, so it was a big deal. They had plenty to learn, and they learned nothing. They had set up a panel, hypothetically, on free speech and its relationship on inclusivity et cetera. The only two people on the panel who were advocating for the free speech position resigned in frustration, and I know that because I know who they are. And so, well, that's just one of the pieces of evidence that they didn't learn anything. They continued to mistreated Shepherd, continually. Her deposition—it's like a novel of stupidity. My sense was, had there been any sign whatsoever of, let's call it, true apology and procedural rectification, she would have left them alone, and so would have I. But there was zero. In fact, if anything, what they did was double down and go underground: here's our apology. Here's our procedures. That's what they showed the world. Here's how nothing at all has changed. No: not good enough. No, they'll do that themselves. Well, they're overwhelmingly administratively top-heavy; and they don't spend any more money on the faculty than they did 30 years ago; and the cost of that administrative top-heaviness, which is well documented—not by me, by other people—has accelerated over the last 20 years. There has been a radical increase in tuition fees, especially compared to the radical decrease in the price of most things over the last 20 years. So they've become administratively top-heavy—and this is especially true in the United States. The way that's been managed is that unsuspecting students are given free access to student loans that will cripple them through their 30s and their 40s, and the universities are enticing them to extend their carefree adolescence for a four-year period, at the cost of mortgaging their future earnings, in a deal that does not allow for escape through bankruptcy. So it's, essentially, a form of indentured servitude. There's no excuse whatsoever for that. It means the administrators have learned how to pick the future pockets of their students, and, because they also view them, in some sense, as sacred cash cows and fragile, let's say—because you might wonder why the students are being treated like they're so fragile. It's like, well, we don't want them to drop out, now do we? If they drop out, then we don't get our hands on their future earnings, in a way they can't escape from. That cripples the economy, because the students come out overladen with debt that they'll never pay off, right at the time when they should be right at the peak of their ability to take entrepreneurial risks. So they can't do that, because they're too crippled by debt. That's absolutely appalling. They're gerrymandering the accredited processes, so that the degree no longer has its credible value. They're enabling the activist disciplines, which have zero academic credibility whatsoever in my estimation, and I'm perfectly willing to defend that claim. By enabling the activist disciplines, they're allowing for the distribution of this absolutely nonsensical view that Western society is fundamentally a patriarchal tyranny, which is absurd on at least five dimensions of analysis, but is becoming increasing the thing you have to believe, if you're allowed to speak in public. What else… Well, that's a good start. They're not teaching students to read critically. They're not introducing them to great literature. They're not teaching them to write. The list goes on and on and on. Well, it depends on how you said it, and to whom. But if you say it to students, then they're so happy to listen to you that they can hardly stand it, because even the most cynical students come to university hoping there's something there worth learning. The reason that they're exposed to great literature, for example—because there is such a thing. It's not all power claims—is because great literature contains the key to wisdom, and you need wisdom to be able to live without undo suffering. So, yes. Would I say that what happened to me is a reflection of the failure of the universities… It is, in part. Although, I did teach this…Well, you want to go for the simple solutions, before you go for the complex ones; and you want to go for the solutions that are associated with ignorance, rather than malevolence, first. I would say that we don't want to underestimate the degree to which what's happening with YouTube and with podcasts, as a consequence of a technological revolution. I've known for years that the universities underserve the community. For some reason, we think that university education is for 18- to 22-year-olds, which is a proposition that's so absurd that it's absolutely mind boggling that anyone ever conceptualized it. It's like, why wouldn't you take university courses throughout your entire life? What, do you stop searching for wisdom when you're 22? I don't think so. You don't even start, usually, until you're, like, in your mid-20s. I knew the universities were underserving the broader community a long time ago, but there wasn't a mechanism by which that could be rectified, apart from, say, books. Of course, that was part of the rectification. So I think you don't want to underestimate the technological transformation. And then I would also say—I mean, I was teaching this in university, so it isn't like there isn't anybody in universities still teaching this sort of thing. There are plenty of qualified professors, who are still doing a good job. But they're being pushed out very rapidly, and terrified, as well, by the activist disciplines. Well, I don't really think that masculinity is in crisis. I think that, to the degree that masculinity per se is regarded as toxic, that will produce a crisis, which isn't the same thing. I think there's a crisis of meaning, let's say, in our culture, but that's not new. That's been the case for quite a long time, but I don't think it's specific to masculinity. That's been a story that's kind of aggregated around me, and the way that happened was, well, the people who don't like what I'm saying look at my audience, and they say, oh, well, he's speaking mostly to men. Therefore he must be speaking to men. It's like, no: the baseline rates for YouTube utilization are about 80 per cent male, so the fact that most of the people who are watching me on YouTube were male is an artefact, to some degree, that most of the people who watch YouTube are male. Now, it may also be that the sorts of things that I'm saying are more pertinent to men—although, I'm not convinced of that. Most of the students throughout my university career have been women, because psychology is dominated by women, to a great degree. Ever since I published my book, the proportion of people who are coming to lectures that is female is reliably increasing. It's probably up to about 35 per cent, I would say, now, from, probably, about 20. I don't think it is a message that is particularly germane to men, although it is germane to men. I don't think that there's, like, an independent crisis of masculinity. There might be a crisis of concepts of masculinity, and I think that's hard on young men, in some ways. The reason for that is you're supposed to be duty bound, as a virtuous person, to buy the doctrine of the tyrannical patriarchy. It's like, well, look. First of all, every hierarchical system tends towards tyranny. That's a universal truism. Our structures have the same problem, obviously, and we have to be eternally vigilant, so they don't devolve into tyranny. But that doesn't mean that they are tyrannies and always have been. Of course, also, compared to what? Compared to your hypothetical ideological utopia? Yes. Compared to every other society that's ever existed on the planet, including most of the ones that exist now? Definitively not. But anyways, if you buy that idiotic unidimensional idea, which is a pathological error, and you see your culture as a tyrannical patriarchy, then you see any attempt to move up that hierarchy as a manifestation of patriarchal tyranny. The problem is that a lot of ways you move up a modern, functional hierarchy is through competence, and if you take young men—it doesn't happen as much with young women, for reasons we can go into—and you say, every manifestation of your desire to move up the hierarchy is nothing but proof of your participating in the tyrannical patriarchy, then you tend to demoralize them, which is exactly what you're trying to do, by the way, if you take that stance to begin with. I really think that, at the bottom of the most pathological manifestations of the collectivist dictum, is the assault on the idea of competence itself. That's another unforgivable sin that the university has committed. There's no doubt that human hierarchies are error prone, and they tilt towards tyranny. Obviously. But that doesn't mean that they are unidimensional patriarchal tyrannies. They're neither patriarchal nor tyrannies, but that's received wisdom, now, and to question that means that you're a misogynistic fascist. So I tell young men, it's like, no, no, no. There's something to competence, man. Well, there has to be an antidote to anything that's manifesting itself in excess. It's chaos that's manifesting itself in excess at the moment, in our culture, and so that's what I decided to address in this book. Mostly that was because, I suppose, it was addressed, at least in part, to younger people; and what younger people have to contend with, generally speaking, is an excess of chaos, because they're not very disciplined. We kind of have this idea that, well, you're free as a child, and then you… Let me see if I can put this properly… That you have a certain delightful, wonderful, positive freedom as a child, and then that's given up, as you approach adulthood. But the truth of the matter is that you have a lot of potential as a child, but none of that is capable of manifesting itself as freedom, before you become disciplined; and discipline is a matter of the imposition of order, and the order is necessary, especially for people who are hopeless and nihilistic, and lots of people are hopeless and nihilistic—way more people than you think. Part of that is because no one's ever really encouraged them. The book is, in part, a matter of encouragement. It's like, lay a disciplinary structure on yourself. Get the chaos in check. And then you can move towards a state that's freer, because it's discipline first. If you're going to become a concert pianist, there's going to be several thousand hours of extraordinarily disciplined practice. That's the imposition of order on your potential, let's say. But what comes out of that is a much grander freedom. And so, virtually every freedom that you have in life that's true freedom is purchased at the price of discipline. Because I think that it's nihilism and hopelessness that constitute the major existential threat—especially to young people, at the moment—then I was concentrating on the necessity of discipline and order. The issue with regards to the metaphysical or symbolic representation of chaos as feminine… Well, that's a very complex problem. The first thing you have to understand is that there's no a priori supposition that order is preferable to chaos, in any fundamental sense. They're not constituent elements of reality. You can't say one's bad and the other's good. You can say that they can become unbalanced, and that's definitely not good. Too much chaos is not good, obviously. Too much order is not good, equally obviously. Those are the two extremes you have to negotiate between. I'm not making a casual claim, with regards to the idea that reality is an amalgam of chaos and order. I don't think there is any more accurate way of describing the nature of reality. That's the most fundamental… Maybe not the most fundamental truth, but it's certainly… There's two. There's two fundamental truths: reality is composed of chaos and order, and your role is to mediate between them successfully. That's metaphysical and symbolic truth—but it's more than that, because that's actually how your mind and your brain is organized: not only conceptually, but emotionally, motivationally, and physiologically. I don't really understand how that can be, because it isn't obvious to me how the most fundamental elements of reality can be chaos and order. But the evidence that that is the case is overwhelming. I can give you a quick example, which is quite interesting. So you have two hemispheres. There's a reason for that. The fundamental reason for that is that one of them is adapted for things you don't understand—that's, roughly speaking, the right hemisphere—and the other is adapted for things you do understand—that's the left hemisphere. And so that's a chaos-order dichotomy. The fact that you're adapted to that, that the very structure of your brain reflects that bifurcation, indicates, as far as I can tell, beyond a shadow of a doubt—because it's also characteristic of nonhuman animals, many of them—that that differentiation is fundamentally true, in some sense. Now you might ask, well, why is that conceptualized as masculine versus feminine? because it's not male versus female, by the way. Those are not the same thing, because one is conceptual. That's extraordinarily complicated. I think the reason is that we're social, cognitive primates, and that our fundamental a priori cognitive categories are masculine, feminine, and child. It's something like that. That's the fundamental structure of reality, because we're social creatures, and we view reality as something that's, essentially, social in its nature. And then, when we started to conceptualize reality outside of the social world—which wasn't very long ago, by the way, and which is something that animals virtually don't do at all—we used those a priori social categories as filters, through which we interpreted the external world. We're sort of stuck with that, in some deep sense. You might say, well, why do we have to be stuck with that? Well, because some things are very difficult to change. If you go watch a story, and the characters in the story slot themselves into those archetypical categories, then you'll understand the stories, and if they don't, you won't, because your understanding is predicated on application of the archetypal a prioris to the story. You wouldn't understand it otherwise, so you can't get under that. There's no under that—not to remain human. I can give you a quick example. I like to use Disney movies for a variety of reasons, mostly because everyone knows them. But it's not accidental that the evil queen in Sleeping Beauty is not an accidental character: she's the way she is because we understand her, and the reason we understand her is because we see the world in the categories that I just laid out. No. If she was an evil king, she'd be different. She'd be like Scar in The Lion King. He's just as evil, man, but not the same character, right?It's stupid. Sorry to be so blunt, but look, the problem with some of this—some of it's wilful blindness, but some it's just ignorance. So let me just lay out a couple of things. For example, I've been taken to task, along, let's say, with James Damore, who had actually been highly influenced by my videos and my classes, before he did what he did at Google. I've studied personality differences between men and women for 25 years and written papers on the topic. It's actually an area of expertise of mine, and substantial expertise, too—and not pseudoscience expertise, thank you very much. I'm not a pseudoscientist. My publication record puts me in the top . 5 per cent of psychologists, so I'm not a pseudoscientist by any stretch of the imagination. I have 10,000 citations—and that's not a million, but it's a lot—and a hundred published papers. Let me lay out one of the personality differences between men and women, because it's worth understanding. You might say, well, there can't be personality differences between men and women, because that's anti-feminist. It's like, no, it's not. We might have to actually understand that there are differences between men and women, so that we can let men and women make the choices they're going to make without subjecting them to undo manipulations. One of the reliable differences between men and women cross culturally is that men are more aggressive than women. Now, what's the evidence for that? Here's one piece of evidence: there are 10 times as many men in prison. What's that, a sociocultural construct? No, it's not a sociocultural construct. OK, here's another piece of data: women try to commit suicide more than men, by a lot, and that's because women are more prone to depression and anxiety than men are, and there's a reasons for that, and that's cross culturally true, as well. They're more likely to try to commit suicide, but men are way more likely to actually commit suicide. Why? Because they're more aggressive, so they use lethal means. OK, so now the question is, how much more aggressive than women? The answer is, not very much. So the claim that men and women are more the same than different is actually true, but this is where you have to know something about statistics to actually understand the way the world works, instead of just applying your a priori ideological presupposition to things that are too complex to fit in that rubric. So, if you drew two people out a crowd, one man and one woman, and you had to lay a bet on who was more aggressive, and you bet on the woman, you'd win 40 per cent of the time. OK, so that's quite a lot. It's not 50 per cent of the time, which would be no difference whatsoever, but it's quite a lot. So there are lots of women who are more aggressive than lots of men. So the curves overlap a lot: there's way more similarity than difference, and this is along the dimension where there's the most difference, by the way. But here's the problem: you can take small differences at the average of a distribution; the distributions move off to the side; and then, all the action's at the tail. So here's the situation. You don't care about how aggressive the average person is. It's not that relevant. What you care about is, who is the most aggressive person out of 100? You take 100 people, and you take the most aggressive person, because that's the person you better watch out for. What's the gender? Men, because if you go three standard deviations out from the mean on two curves that overlap but are slightly disjointed, then you derive an overwhelming preponderance of the overrepresented group. That's why men are about 10 times more likely to be in prison. It has nothing to do with socialization. And then there are other differences, too. It turns out that differences in aggression and agreeableness also predict differences in interest. So it turns out that men are more interested, in average, in things than women are; and women are more interested in people, on average. That's actually the biggest difference that's been measured between men and women. It has nothing to do with ability. It has to do with interest. The way that manifests itself is that women are more likely to go into disciplines that are characterized by the care of others, and you can tell that by the way occupations are segregating. All you have to do is look at the data for, like, 15 minutes: women overwhelmingly dominate health care, and that's accelerating, by the way. Men dominate engineering, let's say. You say, that's sociocultural. It's like, no, it's not, and here's the proof. You want to test this hypothesis, right? The other thing you want to understand is that left-leaning psychologists generated this data. You think, well, how do you know that? That's easy: there are no right-leaning psychologists…Well, that's what people say. …and that's been well documented. People have published this data despite their ideological proclivities, and despite the fact that this is not what they expected to find, or what they wanted to find. What you do, now, is you stack countries by how egalitarian their social policies are, from the least egalitarian to the most. You say, well, the Scandinavian countries are the most egalitarian—and, by the way, if we don't agree on that, then there's no sense in having this discussion at all, because we don't agree on what egalitarian means. If you don't think what the Scandinavians have done is move in the direction of egalitarianism, then I have no idea what you mean by egalitarianism. Now, you could say, well, they haven't done it perfectly. It's like, yeah, yeah, it's true, but it's not relevant to this argument. So what you do is you stack countries by how egalitarian their social policies are, and then you look at occupational and personality differences between men and women as a function of the country. What you find is, as the country becomes more egalitarian, the differences between men and women increase. They don't decrease. What that means is that the radical social constructionists are wrong. It's not a few studies with a couple of people, done by some half-wit psychologists in some tiny universities. It's population-level studies that have been published in major journals, that have been cited by thousands of people. It's not pseudoscience. It's not questioned by mainstream psychometricians and personality theorists. We figured this out back in, like, 1995. Everyone thought it was settled. So what's the big problem? Well, who knows what the big problem is. The outcome is not exactly the same between the genders. It's like, who says it has to be? And, more importantly—and this is something to ask yourself constantly—just who the hell's going to enforce that? And just how exactly are they going to enforce that?Believe me, it's not going to be in some manner that you like, because there are differences between men and women, and, if you leave them alone, those differences manifest themselves in different occupational choices: that's the other finding. This is a newer one: as the societies become more egalitarian, the occupational choices between men and women maximize. What that means is that fewer and fewer women go into the STEM fields. Now, no one wanted that. No one predicted it. No one was hoping for it. It actually flew in the face of, I would say, the most established psychological theories. My presupposition certainly was, 20 years ago, that what would have happened, as we made societies more egalitarian, would be that men and women would converge. That's not what happened. The biological differences maximized, as we eliminated the sociocultural differences. Maybe you don't like that. That's fine with me. I didn't say I liked it. But whether or not I like a piece of data has very little bearing on whether or not I'm liable to accept it. I'm trying to look at the damn scientific literature, and to draw the conclusions that are necessitated by the data. And then you can say, well, the whole thing is suspect, because it's the construction of the patriarchal tyrants who generated the Eurocentric scientific viewpoints. It's like, if you want to have that conversation, then go to an activist discipline and have it, because it's not the sort of conversation that anyone sensible would engage in. Or not sensible. Well, I never claimed that the differences between men and women were 100 per cent biologically determined. There are biological influences. The radical constructionist make the opposite claim: there are no biological differences between men and women. First of all, that's so preposterous that it barely even requires an answer, but you might specify it a bit, and say, no, there are no biological differences that manifest themselves psychologically. That's not quite as preposterous, but it's also incorrect. It's obviously the case that all sorts of things about sex roles and gender roles, let's say, are conditioned by sociocultural mechanisms, because human beings are very, very plastic. And so the manner in which those biological differences manifest themselves in a culture is radically influenced by the nature of the culture, but that doesn't mean that the biological influences don't exist. That's controlled for by the comparison between societies that have different levels of egalitarianism built into their social structure. It's all taken care of in the analysis: if the biological differences manifest themselves maximally where the sociocultural influences to equalize gender are maximal, then, obviously, the biological differences are powerful and profound. It's conclusive. So it's taken into account in the data analysis. That's why you stack up the countries. The egalitarian nature of their social policies is to control for the sociocultural influence. You gotta admit—just think it through, for a minute. It isn't even that—what you would have expected, theoretically, is that the societies that are the least egalitarian would have the biggest differences between men and women, and that, as the societies got more and more egalitarian, those differences would get smaller, and maybe disappear, even. But that isn't what happened. Exactly the opposite is what happened: they maximized in the most egalitarian societies. Therefore the social constructionist position—the radical social constructionist position—is wrong. It's wrong. It's been refuted, which is partly why the radical social constructionists have taken the legislative route to impose their viewpoint. They lost the scientific war: well, then we can just attack science. It's science itself that's suspect. Well, then quit using your iPhones. Well, if you're going to have your convictions, man, lay them out in your life. If you think the scientific process is suspect and tyrannical and oppressive, and all that, then quit using the products that it produces. You don't get to have your cake and eat it, too. Yeah: enforced monogamy. First of all, that's a technical term, by the way. That's been used in the anthropological literature for a hundred years. The journalist, who was not stupid, knew that perfectly well, and reported the story the way she reported it despite that. But what's even more surreal about that story is that, if you're going to try to undermine someone's credibility and do it effectively, you should attribute to them an extreme view that some person, somewhere, actually holds. OK, so the view that was attributed to me was something like, I want to…Exactly: I want to find useless men and distribute women to them at the point of a gun, so that they don't become violent. It's like, no one has ever believed that, ever, anywhere. That's right. She wrote a book about that. But, so, it's just absolutely preposterous. It's preposterous in a bunch of ways, because she interviewed me for about two days, and we talked about that for about two minutes. It was a peripheral conversation. It's an anthropological truism—generated primarily by scholars on the left, just so everyone's clear about it—that societies that use monogamy as a social norm—which, by the way, is virtually every human society that's ever existed—do that in an attempt to control the aggression that goes along with polygamy. It's like, oh, my God! How contentious can you get? Well, how many of you are in monogamous relationships? Well, the majority. How is that enforced?So it was just… It was desperate. That's what it looked like to me. The problem is, it was also desperate and amateurish. She could have done a much better job with a much less extreme characterization. It's like, oh, yes: I want to take women at the point of a gun and distribute them to useless men. It's so stupid, partly because, if she would have been reasonable—and she knew this, too—one of the things I've told men specifically, over and over and over and over, is, if you're being rejected by all the women that you approach, it's not the women! Right. These characters, like the guy who mowed down those people in Toronto—he ends up blaming women. He's blaming more than women: in some sense, he's blaming the structure of Being, for producing women that reject him. That's part of what makes him violent. It's like, well, what the hell's wrong with him? He's got it completely backwards. If everyone you talked to was boring, it's not them, right? So, if you're rejected by the opposite sex—assuming that you're heterosexual—then you're wrong: they're not wrong, and you've got some work to do, man. You've got some difficult work to do. There isn't anything I've been telling, let's say, young men, that's clearer than that. It's actually something I've been criticized by, by people on the left. They think I don't take structural inequality, for example, and so forth, into account sufficiently. What I've been telling people is, take the responsibility for your failure onto yourself. That certainly applies to, well, especially when you're trying to formulate a relationship, and you're getting rejected left, right and center. That's a hint that you have some work to do. Now, it might also be a hint that you're just young and useless, and why the hell would anybody have anything to do with you, because you don't have anything to offer. But that's rectified, and, partly, even maturity rectifies that. So not only was that… what would you call it… accusation surreal and absurd, made by a journalist who knew perfectly well what I was suggesting and chose to misrepresent it anyways, the conclusion that people derive from that is exactly the opposite of what I'd been suggesting, in particular, to young men. So it's absolutely preposterous. OK, first of all, I wouldn't know, right? which is partly why your scepticism is justified. But I have to be responsible for what I say, based on my willingness to take responsibility for my judgment. So I would be willing to do that, despite the fact that I could be wrong. But, having said that, in any reasonable situation, I would err on the side of addressing the person in the manner they requested to be addressed. But that's not the issue for me: the issue is, now I'm compelled by law to do so. It's like, no, not doing it—not now, because it's compelled by law. So that's the end of the game, as far as I'm concerned. There is no excuse for compelling it by law. That's my position, and I think there's all sorts of reasons for that. I don't think it was an isolated legislative move. I think it's part and parcel of a whole sequence of legislative moves that have been made and continue to be made in Canada. I think it's an attempt by a certain radical ideology to gain the linguistic upper hand, which I think is a terrible thing to do—to allow. So I had lots of reasons for rejecting the legislation. But it had nothing to do with…No: there's a way of thinking that would allow me to decide, for me. No: I had a perfectly straightforward mission, which was, there was no damn way I was going to say those words, when I was compelled to by law. That was my mission. It was about me and the law. I thought the lawmakers had gone too far. They'd stepped out of their appropriate territory, into the domain of linguistic freedom. As far as I was concerned, I wasn't going to put up with that. And so, if people were happy about that and wanted to follow the example, that was fine with them. But for me, it was something—and that was the statement: I'm not doing this. And then people can draw their own conclusions from that. Maybe they want to do it. I've spoken to no shortage of trans people. My proclivity has been, without exception, so far, to address them in the manner that seems most socially appropriate under the circumstances. Now, you asked a specific question, which was, do I have special expertise that I might share with other people?What makes you think that you're doing the kids that are grandstanding any favours, by going along with their manipulation?Fair enough, but you have a type one and a type two error problem. One error is that you don't call students what they deserve to be called. That's one error. The other error is that you call students what they want to be called, even though they don't deserve it. So what you're trying to do, optimally, is trying to minimize both those errors. To do that, you have to take a middle route. Now, what you've decided to do—and I'm not criticizing it—is to allow for the possibility 100 per cent of one of those errors, because you think it's a less significant error. You might be right. But it's not like you're acting in an error-free manner: you've just decided to minimize one form of error at the expense of the other. I would say you're allowing attention-seeking and somewhat narcissistic undergraduates to gain the upper hand over you in your class. Believe me, it's not a criticism. I understand why you're doing it. I don't think it has anything to offer that I could teach you without… Hm, let me think. No, no. It's not that. Well, it is that, in part, because it's not easy to articulate out the unerring principles by which you would make such a categorical judgement, because those are very situation-specific problems. It's part of the problem of how to make a generic moral truth apply to a very individualistic situation. The problem in the sorts of situations you're describing is, generally, the devil's in the details, right? You have all these student, the ones you just laid out. They vary in their attitude towards their self-professed gender, from the ones who are grandstanding to some degree, let's say, to the ones that are very serious. You have to make a judgement, in the moment, that is dependent on the variables that present themselves in a very complex way, in that situation. I understand why you took the pathway that you took. It's perfectly reasonable to do so. My point was that you don't minimize all the errors by doing so. It's fine. It's still a fine way of approaching. My point was that, because of my psychological acumen, I would say, the experience that I've derived, is that I would be comfortable in making the judgement and taking the consequential risk. I'm not saying I'd be correct. That's not the same thing at all. I'm willing to suffer the consequences of my error. It's not the same thing as being right. And so, if I feel that a student is manipulating me, then I'm not going to go along with it. Now, I might be wrong about that and actually hurt someone, who's genuinely asking for something that they need. But I'm also… what would you say… sensitive to the error of allowing manipulation to go unchecked. Aha! You're back. I don't know if I've started to think about the point that they have that I didn't think about before. I mean, people have been characterizing me as right wing. I'm not right wing, so the characterization isn't very helpful. One of the things I do all the time in my public lectures is make a case for the utility of the left. The case can be made quite rapidly: If you're going to pursue things of value in a social environment, you're going to produce a hierarchy. It's unavoidable, because some people are better at whatever it is that you value. And so, when that lays itself out socially, it will produce a hierarchy. The hierarchy has a necessity, if you're going to pursue the things of value. But it has a risk: the risk is, that will ossify and become corrupt. That's risk number one. Risk number two is that, when you produce the hierarchy, you're going to dispossess a number of people, because there will be lots of people in the hierarchy, who aren't good at it, and they'll be dispossessed. So you need a political voice for them. That's the left. So I make that case over and over. What the right does is say, yeah, but we still need the hierarchy. It's like, yes, you still need the hierarchy. The reason we need the political dialog is because we need the hierarchy, and we can't let it get out of control. The way to balance those two competing necessities isn't by only having the hierarchy or by dissolving the hierarchy. You have to live with the tension, because the situation keeps shifting. So the way you live with the tension is by talking. You say, well, there's the current state. The hierarchy needs to be tweaked this much, because it's getting too tyrannical, and it's dispossessing too many people. We need to tweak it, so it's not as corrupt, and so it's a little bit more open. We have to talk about that all the time. It's not the only thing the right and left do, because they also talk about the necessity of borders. That's the other fundamental thing that they do. The dialog has to continue, so that we can have the hierarchies and utilize them as tools, without allowing them to descend into tyranny. I made a case on the web. I did a talk at the University of British Columbia, A Left-Wing Case for Free Speech—as if that's so difficult to make. I mean, that's the sort of case that was made until, like, 2014, or something like that. So the left-leaning types have all sorts of things, that are correct, to say. One of the problems of the left—and this is another thing that I talk about all the time in my public lectures, by the way: we know how to put a box around the extremists on the right. Basically, we say, oh, you're making claims of ethnic or racial superiority: you're not part of the conversation anymore. What do we do on the left? Nothing! That's not good, because there's an issue: can the left go too far? Yes. When? Oh, we don't know. Well, that's not a very good answer. Now, you could say, well, then it's up to the moderate leftists, to figure that out, so they can dissociate themselves from the radicals. And it is up to them, but that's actually not a very good answer either, because it's all of our problem. Centrists don't know how to reliably identify the too-radical left. Right wingers don't know how. And it's partly because it's actually, I think, more conceptually complex. With the radical right, you can kind of lay it down to one dimension: oh, racial superiority. Nope: you're out of the conversation. Well, possibly. Yeah. I haven't followed Milo that carefully, and it's possible that he is. It's hard to tell what Milo is, exactly. He's a very complicated and contradictory person, destined to implode, which is exactly what happened. There's just no way you can be that contradictory a person and manage it. It's just not possible. He was just too many things happening at the same time for anyone to ever manage. But on the left… I don't know what it is. I think the left becomes toxic—one of the things that makes the left unacceptable is demands for equality of outcome. It's like, nope. You've crossed the line, man. That's not an acceptable demand, and that's increasingly a moderate leftist demand, as well. It might be more complex. It might that there's four things that you have to demand, on the left, that all of a sudden makes what you're doing unacceptable, and we don't know what those four things are. So I actually think it's a conceptual problem, as well as an ethical problem. We don't know how to bind the necessary left, so that the radicals don't dominate counterproductively. And if you don't think that the radical leftists can dominate counterproductively, then, well, heaven help you. Oh, I don't think that it's necessarily applied very clearly. But, at least conceptually, it's more…We can point it out better. Yes. That helped quite a lot, actually. But the thing is that the communist catastrophes don't seem to have made it any clearer on the left. That's another thing that the universities have done that's unacceptable, by the way—the intellectual class, by the way. It's never come to terms properly with the fact that the intellectual class, as a whole, was supportive of the communist experiment, and it was an absolutely catastrophic failure on every measure of analysis. People say, well, that wasn't real communism. It's like, you really shouldn't ever say that. This is what it means. It's the most arrogant statement that a person can make. It means that, had I been in the position of Stalin, with my proper conceptualization of the Marxist utopia, I would have ushered in the utopia. That's what it means. It's like, no. First of all, if you actually were that good spirited—and you're not, by the way—you would have been eliminated so fast after the revolution occurred that it would have, well, it would have killed you. That's what happened: after the Russian Revolution, the small minority of people that were generally well meaning, they were dead, like, within two or three years. So that wasn't real communism. Oh, incorrect. I was wrong about the Big Five personality theory for about five years. I know that's not very interesting to any of you, but I didn't like it at all. It was brute force statistically derived. It wasn't theoretically interesting. I didn't like it at all, but I was wrong about that, because the science was well done. What else have I been wrong about… Well, you asked for profound examples of being wrong. In my field, that's actually a profound example, because that's one of the major theories of the field. You're thinking of more interesting examples…. What have I changed radically… Oh, when I was a kid, I was an avid socialist. I was wrong about that. But more specifically, I was wrong about that because I thought that there were questions I wanted to answer that that doctrine could answer. It wasn't that it was socialism that didn't make the answers emerge: it was that it was the wrong level of analysis. That was a major source of error. It was, sort of, the source of error that the journalists that are going after me are making. They think everything is political. It's like, no, it's not. There's lots of levels of analysis, and the political is one. I learned, eventually, that the political wasn't the right level of analysis for the questions I was interested in addressing. That was a major error. It took me years to sort that out, and to figure out what the consequence was. I was wrong about the significance of religious ideas, because, when I was a kid—13, or so, and I was smart enough at that point to see the contradiction between the evolutionary account of the origin of human beings and, say, a scriptural account—I just dispensed with that in a, sort of, new atheist move. I threw the baby out with the bathwater, and I was really wrong about that—like, profoundly wrong about that. I'm sure I'm profoundly wrong about a bunch of other things, but I'll figure out what some of those are as we go ahead. So that's three things. Those are big things. If I thought more, I could come up with other examples. But those are pretty big things I was wrong about. Oh, I think that was probably—I wrote about this in the last chapter of my book, which is called, pet a cat when you encounter one on the street. You think, what's the worst thing that can happen to you? Well, I think the worst thing is that you do something really horrible, and you screw up your life and everyone's life around you. That's bad. Yes, yes. You have to live with knowing you did it. That's rough, man. That's sin. Right, there are worse things than dying. That's a bad thing, but I think the hardest existential situation that I've been in was the situation with my daughter. She was very, very ill. She had arthritis, 40 effected joints. It started to bother her when she was two, but, really, manifested itself fully when she was six. Some of the medical treatment helped, but, when she was 14-through-16, first her hip disintegrated, and so she had that replaced, after walking around on it for like a good year. And then her ankle disintegrated on her other foot, and she had to have it replaced. And so there were two years of absolutely brutal pain for her—like brutal, daily, excruciating pain. We were really running around, trying to figure out what to do about it. The hip wasn't too hard to replace, because surgeons are actually pretty good at hip replacements. But ankles are still touch-and-go. Watching what it was doing to her… because she was in enough pain… At one point, it just about broke her. I mean, you've probably been in a situation where you were in pain for a night, and you couldn't sleep. It's like, yeah, fine. So multiply that by five and extend it over two years. Jesus Christ. She was on, like, huge doses of opiates. So that was sedating her, so that made her look drunk in public. She could only stay awake about six hours a day, and she had to take Ritalin to stay awake, because otherwise she was just sleeping all the time. It was a very bad autoimmune condition, and so it wasn't only manifest in the joint deterioration and the pain, because arthritis is also very painful, and 40 joints happens to be quite a lot. Yeah, right. It was absolutely brutal beyond belief. Yeah, well, that's what that chapter's about. So what do you do when things are too much? Well, one of the answers is, you narrow your timeframe. Another answer is, you look for occasions of grace and beauty where you can get them. She had a dog. That really helped. So that was something that was with her all the time. We tried to put things in her life that she could care for. She had a whole raft of pets, although she was allergic to almost everything, so most of them were lizards. It's like, oh, here's a guinea pig! Oh, I love this guinea pig!And then, three hours later, she'd have a big rash, and we'd have to take the guinea pig to the pet store. So the dog, luckily, she could tolerate. So we had the dog for her. But one of the things you do when you're in a situation like that, and it's just a bloody ongoing nightmare, is that you shrink your timeframe. What are we going to do in a year? It's like, Oh, god. I can't even think about that. Yeah—a week, tomorrow, today, the next hour… Yeah, so that's what we had to do. You shrink your timeframe until you can tolerate it. You can't. Yeah, there's too much uncertainty. You think, OK, how can I make the next hour the least amount of awful possible? That's what you do at someone's death bed. You shrink your timeframe, and that's what you have to do. Yeah, well, sometimes you have to…That's right. You have to re-navigate, because even the best laid plans of mice and men go astray. That's part of being alive. And so you have your map, but, you know, if you get a flat tire along the way, you still have to stop and fix your car. Maybe the bloody thing bursts into flames, and you have to get a new car. Your ascent towards your goals can be punctuated by unexpected catastrophe. Well, then, hopefully, you've made yourself into a resilient person at that point, and the catastrophe is no worse than it has to be, and you're not making it worse. One of the things we were fortunate about is that, by the time she got really ill, my relationship with my wife was pretty well put-together, and my relationship with my son, who's younger than her, was also well put-together. And so he was an absolute trooper, man. For a lot of his teenaged life, in particular, there was a huge amount of focus on the suffering of his sister. And we were like right up to here with that. It was enough. And he conducted himself admirably. If he caused trouble, we didn't know about it. He kept it to himself. I don't mean he was hiding. I mean he dealt with it, and he spent a lot of time at home, and he didn't do any unnecessary stupid things, and he put up with his sister and his parents, who were on edge a lot, without adding additional catastrophe and misery and grief to it. And when she was a little bit crazy and was leaning on him too hard or bothering him, he was there to support her, and it was massively helpful. My wife and I weren't any more crazy towards each other than we had to be, and so there wasn't any additional stress during those periods of time. It would have sunk us. That's right. That's right. Well, that's also part of the vision of hell. It's like, well, what's the alternative? You let things go, and you make them worse?No, there's no excuse for that. Yeah, well, we made rules, and we talked about some of them. Some of the rules were—we didn't talk about my daughter's illness after 8 o'clock at night. That was a rule. It's like, no. Well, it's a war. You wear yourself out in a week, you're dead, and everyone suffers a lot. So you got to keep going through, however long it's going to be. What do you have to do? Well, you have to sleep. You have to sleep, or things are going to go badly. That's right. Stop talking and go to sleep. Yeah, so you have to. Yeah, and I had learned some of that, because I'd been a clinical psychologist for a long time, and so I'd been dealing with people's problems. You think, well, how can you go home when you have all those problems to contend with? It's like, they're not ‘your' problems. No, and they're not going away. Having them bring you down is not helping the person who has the problem—the same with my daughter. Had my wife and I deteriorated as consequence of her condition, that would have been horrible for her, because then she would have had to bear the weight of watching her illness destroy her family, right?Oh, Christ, yes. That's one of the terrible things about having a very bad illness, is that, not only does it do you in, but you can see it taking its toll on the people around you. I think that might even be worse. I mean, this is gradations of hell, but still… So you also can't allow that to happen. If you have a loved person around you and they're ill, you have the moral obligation not to let it tear you down, because then it's on them. That's no good. And you think, well, how can you remain healthy and strong in the face of the terrible suffering of someone who's close to you?That's it. The alternative is worse. Right, and then we both drown faster. Not helpful. Well, that's what we told her: it's life, kid. It's not you. We also told her very, very many times, and we were very careful about this: do not use your illness as an excuse. As soon as you do that, you can't tell the difference between the illness and your character. So don't let it turn you into a victim, even though it's obviously a catastrophe. We were very clear about that, and that it wasn't her fault—but that she still had to bear up under it as well as possible, and to do everything she could, and not use it as an excuse. We talked to her about that a lot, and were clear about it. I've seen this—this is one of the things I really dislike about what the universities are doing with disability. It's like, everybody gets a disability! And no wonder, because people have hard lives. It's very rare to find someone who isn't suffering under an undo load of some sort—there's something wrong with them…Or there's something wrong in their family that's serious, or they have terrible economic pressure. There's something wrong. It's like, OK, we should make allowances for you. Oh, yeah? What allowances? What exactly does that entitle me to? Well, I tell you, man, that is a murky place you do not want to go, because then you don't know anymore. It's like, well, what's my responsibility? I have this undo burden to bear. Well, how does that mitigate my responsibility? The answer is, as little as possible. You don't go there, because you get confused, and as soon as you get confused, the illness has not only got you physiologically, it's got you psychologically. And then you're in deep trouble. To her great credit, as far as I can tell… I wouldn't say she never used her illness as an excuse, because never is a lot, or never is an extreme. But she certainly withstood the temptation to do it habitually, and to warp her character as a consequence. She did figure out what was wrong with her, and fixed it. And so now she doesn't have any of these—she's healthy now. Well, she still has some residual damage from everything that happened. I just found out yesterday—she went to Chicago to have her ankle checked out, because it isn't working very well. They told her she had to have the old replacement taken out and the new one put in. But, in her realm of catastrophe, that actually constitutes news that's not as bad as it could be, strangely enough. So it's not like she's out of the woods, but…Well, no, it wasn't that, exactly. It was, never use that as an excuse to not do something you could do. Yes, because there's a deception element, there. It's like, I don't want to do that, and I have this illness…That's right. Don't use your illness as a means of getting away with something, because you'll blur the line. Right. If you do that 100 times, you'll be so confused about what's illness and what's not that you'll not know. You won't know anymore, and maybe you won't be able to figure it out again. And then you're in a very bad place. There were some things that she had to have done that were allowances. When she was doing exams, she had to type, because she couldn't write, and she couldn't sit on the floor crosslegged, so she had to sit in a chair. So things she actually couldn't do. Yes, right. And the consequence of that was, once she figured out that most of what was bothering—all of it, by the look of it—was a consequence of a set of extreme sensitivities to almost every sort of food. So she hardly eats anything now. The only thing she eats is beef. Beef, salt, water. That's it. Nothing else. And she's been eating that way for—well, mostly for almost three years, but almost completely for a year. She's 100 per cent. She has no symptoms. No, that's it: beef, salt. I'm serious. She never cheats. Never. Well, if she eats the wrong thing, she has a catastrophic emotional and physical reaction for a month. Yes. It took about three years to figure it out. So, yes: wow is right. It's absolutely beyond comprehension. It's a diet that I follow almost entirely now. Yes. I've been eating that way for about three months, and I've been on an extremely low carb diet for about two and a half years. Something like that. Both my wife and I have autoimmune symptoms, and she got all of them. That's right. But when she sorted out what was wrong, she convinced me to also try what she was doing. It's been extraordinarily helpful for me, too. Who would have guessed it? So, anyways, what you do when things are too much for you, is you narrow your timeframe—also in chapter 12, there's a fair bit of discussion in there about fragility and vulnerability, which is really what you confront when you have a sick kid. It's like, oh, my God. How can the world be constituted so that a child can unfairly suffer in this manner? It's like, OK, here's a way of thinking about it: take away everything from your child that makes them vulnerable. Let's say I have a three year old. Well, three year olds are kind of cute. They run around, they're little, and they're vulnerable, obviously. But that makes them cute and attractive and lovable: all of the vulnerability that's built into that. Well, you remove that one by one. Well, they're 8 feet tall now, and they're made out of steel, and their parts are replaceable, and they have an artificial intelligence brain. You replace them—obviously this is hypothetical—with a superhuman robot that doesn't die. It's like, fine, but where's the three year old? One of the things I thought about when I was writing was, when you love someone—well, especially when you love someone, you love them not only despite their fragility, but also because of it. And so then that's the price you pay for it. It's like, well, they wouldn't be who they were if they weren't fragile and limited in their particular way, and the fact that you like to have them around. You think, oh, well, I guess you think that fragility and vulnerability is justifiable: then you can't allow that existence to make you bitter, because you can't have it both ways: you can't have them being vulnerable and cute and interesting and small and needing care but striving to develop and grow—you can't have that without them also being prone to pain and destruction and vulnerability. Take your choice. And then what do you do? Teach them to be strong. That's what you do. You don't get rid of the vulnerability. You teach them to be strong. That's also a theme that runs through the book, in many many ways. You don't protect your children. In fact, you do the opposite. You expose them to the world as much as you possibly can, and you make them strong. That's the best antidote to their vulnerability—not to protect them. There's no protecting people. We already established that. Life's a fatal game. There's no protecting people. But you can definitely make them strong, and maybe you can make them strong enough to transcend that. That's the goal, man. Not of any great significance. I mean, I have wishes, I suppose, from time to time, that things could have been different. I spent less time on the positive aspects of my son and my daughter, because we were contending with catastrophe so frequently. Both my kids have a variety of interesting talents, and it would have been better, perhaps, to have had the time to develop those more thoroughly, but… My son, he… Well, I wouldn't say he didn't get as much attention as he needed. He didn't get as much attention as I would have liked to have paid him. But, by the same token, it isn't obvious that it's been bad for him, because it required him from a very early age to grow the hell up. We relied on him right from the time he was a young kid to make intelligent decisions. We assumed he would make intelligent decisions. He was consulted with regards to decisions. It also made him into someone who is very self-sufficient and capable of taking care of himself. It might have been nicer for me, I suppose, to have spent more time with him, but he lives down the street from me now, and I spend time with him, and we have a great relationship, and he has a very good relationship with his sister. And so it turned out as well as it could have. But that didn't mean that those years in there… They were brutal. There were some brutal times, man. One night in particular, she was in absolutely agony, and I couldn't get it under control, and I could see—because I am a clinician, I thought, god damn it. I'm going to end up taking her to CAMH—that's the psychiatric hospital—because it looks like it's going to break her. God damn it. I couldn't see a way to resolve it. It pushed her right to the brink, but not over. And there was another episode after she had her hip replaced. She was put in a rehab home hospital for a while, and she was the youngest person in it by like 60 years, and they treated her terribly. It was a terrible place—mean, blind nurses, and very badly run. They traumatized her. The hospital was a worse experience than the damn surgery. And so that took her quite a while to recovery from, but she did recover from it. Well, I think it was fortunate for all of us that—well, my wife, too. My wife had worked in palliative care as a volunteer, and she was a massage therapist for a long time. And my wife has a real—she's a really tough person, and if you don't need help and you want it, she'll cut you into ribbons. But if you need help, she will really help you. So she's really good at differentiating between people who actually need help—in which case she is right there—and people who could stand up on their own. And if you could stand up on your own and you aren't, you don't want to be around her, because she will put you in your place. It was so funny, because our kids used to bring their friends over all the time, when they were teenagers, which we actually quite liked. But we had a rule for the teenagers, which was, we're really happy you're here, but if you do something stupid and you never get to come back? That's actually OK with us. And so they knew that, and it was no joke, because we were happy they were there, and they were welcome. But we were perfectly happy to dispense with them, if they misbehaved. But what was really funny was that the teenagers would come over, and they were pretty afraid of me, to begin with. But after being around for a couple of weeks, they were way more afraid of my wife. Yes, so that was very funny, because she's quite a pleasant person, and she's only 5 foot 2—although, she's imposing enough, because she's in good physical shape. I'm actually kind of softhearted, and she's not softhearted—although, she can really take care of people who need to be taken care of. So I think Mikhaila had a fortunate circumstance in that sense, because both of us had a lot of experience dealing with catastrophe. When it came along, we were overwhelmed by it, but it wasn't because we didn't know what we were doing. We knew what we were doing; but even though we did know what we were doing, as much as might be possible, that doesn't mean that we could deal with it, because, well, it took us… What… Seven or eight months to arrange the ankle surgery, and there was a waiting list in Canada, at that point, I think, of three years. Actually, they wanted to fuse her foot, which is a really bad thing for someone young. And so we looked in India, we looked in… Well, Christ, we looked all over the world for ankle surgery—really, everywhere. The government in Canada was actually quite helpful. We found a private clinic in Vancouver that did the surgery, and the Ministry of Health in Ontario was quite helpful to us, at that point. But we were scrambling to… Well, what should we do? Should we have her ankle replaced? Well, what kind of replacement? Who do we talk to? What about this waiting list? Three years? No; she can't live, man. Well, no. I never thought it was for nothing, but I certainly doubted whether or not we were going to be able to figure this out. Of course, of course. Well, her prognosis was multiple early joint replacements, and that was the good news. The bad news was, well, how many? and how many can you stand? and when does that kill you? Her real prognosis was, plenty of pain with an early death. Well, even now, the surgeon who talked to her yesterday said—he talked to her about the risk of amputation in the future. Well, this is the second joint revision. Maybe this one will last 15 years. We don't know what the hell's going to happen. Well, so our response to that is, that's 15 years from now. Well, things are better now for how people understand how to replace an ankle than they were—it was 10 years ago that she had this one replaced, and it helped. It wasn't perfect. Her hip was perfect. The ankle has always been trouble, but way less trouble than it was. And so, well, you struggle forward the best you can. I suppose she could adapt to an amputation that was necessary, but at the moment, that isn't necessary. But multiple amputations is not really something to be looking forward to when you're 16. And they were going to put her on corticosteroids to control her inflammation. That would have produced Cushing's disease, so that makes your face all puffy. It makes you gain weight, and it's very physically disfiguring, so we decided to not go down that route. Yeah, well, it's worked out. Thank God. It's quite the miracle. She had a baby a year ago, and we were never sure that was going to happen. Thank you, yes. That's for sure. So now we have this respite, where she's healthy. The last time I saw her, she was looking great. She was just glowing. She's so healthy. I can't believe it. It's just beyond belief. Yeah, well, we avoided the worst excesses of hell during the catastrophe, so that's something. And it did allow her the space to figure out—and my wife had always thought that diet had a relationship to it. We investigated that. There's a good literature that shows, if you have arthritic symptoms and you stop eating, you fast, they go away. So that's interesting. It's like, well, food must be causing it. Well, yeah, but once you start eating again, what you eat comes back. It turns out, no, not ‘no matter what. ' Almost no matter what, because she's sensitive to virtually everything, but she isn't sensitive to meat. And so it turns out that, if you eat meat, you can live. So that's a big difference between being sensitive to everything and not being sensitive to one thing. It's a harsh diet. It's made travelling difficult, although I can eat in restaurants, because most restaurants can cook a steak with nothing on it, and that's made things much easier while I'm travelling. But whatever, it's working. So thank God for that. Well, I wouldn't have written the 12th chapter. That's for sure. Yeah, I think so. But I know what you're saying. Your question is, to what degree is adversity character building? The answer to that is, plenty. But I was already—and it was the same with my wife. We weren't naive people. Because I had an extensive clinical practice, I was dealing with heavy-level adversity, always, 25-hours a week. No, no. But there were other problems in my family and so forth that I dealt with, as well. We'd already, I think, garnered most of what we could from confronting adverse situations. Now, did that add a different level to it… It probably brought our family closer together, all things considered. I saw the same thing happen when my wife's mother died. She died of prefrontal dementia. She developed it quite young. It started to really manifest itself in her early 50s, and she died when she was 70. She fell apart over 18 years, and she was very physically healthy. Her husband, who was quite the man about town when he was a young guy—a real extrovert; he was a real character in our home town. He took care of her so well it was absolutely jaw-dropping. Every time she slipped, he'd step up to the plate. He took care of her until he couldn't lift her out of her chair anymore, and he was getting old, too. So she wasn't in an old age home for very long. And then we were around when she died, over the couple of days just before her death. Her family—her sister is a palliative care nurse, her other sister is a pharmacist, and Tammy's had the experiences that I already described, and then her father really stepped up to the plate. So the whole family really gathered around for that, and they acted impeccably throughout it, I would say. They took care of their mother very carefully while she was dying. They pulled together, and one of the consequences of that, which was so interesting, was that, although their mother died and that was a terrible loss, their bonds that connected them—all of them strengthened, to the point where I would say that was almost compensation for the loss of their mother. So that was really interesting: to see what happens even in a dire circumstance, if people do what they can. Now, I'm not saying that that's going to work for every situation, because I know people get cut off at the knees, and sometimes you hit a tragedy that, well, it's fatal. You cannot rectify; it's a real catastrophe. But it was very interesting, watching that, because they were alert and awake around the deathbed, and they weren't fighting with each other at all. There was no familial squabbling, because you can imagine that that would happen, because everyone's stressed. And then you can just imagine how terrible that would make something that's already awful. There was none of that. They focused their attention on her. They gave her water when she needed it. They washed her, and they made this terrible thing the least amount of awful it could be, and it definitely pulled them together. That whole family, including me, is closer because of what they went through, and also how they went through it. It's probably the case… Well, I would say it definitely advanced the maturity of my son, because he was—and I told him, look, kid, you can't add anything to this. We're up to here. You have to conduct yourself properly, because otherwise, everything's going to shake and fall. We can't have more of this. You can't bring anything unnecessary into this. It was remarkable. He was only in grade 10 when most of this happened, and your friends are pretty damn important when you're in grade 10; and he stuck around a lot, to be helpful. So, yeah. It was really good for him, man. Yeah, he's a good character. He's quite something, and he was very helpful to his sister. They had their fights, obviously. She was often unreasonable, and no bloody wonder. Well, when you're strung out…God, she went through so much. Even watching her withdraw from the opiates—because she was on them for a year and a half. She just quit. As soon as she was done her surgery: I'm not taking these anymore. She had formication, which is the sensation of ants crawling under your skin. She had that for like a month. Oh, God… Unbelievable. She just sailed through it. Like, I'm done with these. Yeah. Yeah, it was a lot, man. Oh, making a mistake, at the moment. I've been the subject of so much public attention in the last two years, and I've been in this situation where, well, even things I didn't say have also, almost, been fatal, because people take them out of context. But my biggest fear has been that I do something careless, and that there are serious cascading consequences to it. Well, everyone's done something careless. But I've been pretty careful. I was fortunate—so, when this political scandal blew up around me in Canada, when I opposed legislation that I thought was reprehensibly constructed, the radicals on the left, in particular, came after me hard. But I was fortunate because—they called me every name under the book and went after my character. And, you know, I suppose there was some degree of… That was understandable, to some degree, because if you stand up against the radical right, well, maybe you're a communist. Probably not, because you don't have to be a communist to not like the radical right. But if you stand up against he radical left, well, maybe you're a Nazi. Probably not, but you might be. So it's certainly in the interest of the people who are proponents of the philosophy of the radical left to assume that you're a Nazi, because then they don't have to deal with you. And so that's what happens: you throw yourself into the fray, people try to localize you, and they do that by saying, maybe you're this! Maybe you're this! Maybe you're this! It's like, well, yeah—maybe not, too. I already had 250 hours of lectures up on YouTube at that point; so people could actually go and see what I had said, because virtually every word I'd ever said to students in a professional capacity—not every word, because I didn't tape every lecture. But I taped multiple years of lectures, and so people went over those with a fine-toothed comb, trying to find out if there's anything I'd ever said that—and they couldn't find anything, and that was because I'd been very careful with what I said. Ever since I was about 25, I started paying attention to what I was saying, and trying very hard not to say things that something in me objected to. And, well, that seems to have provided me with a buffer. People came to my website, because they were interested in—well, before the political stuff blew up, I had a million views on YouTube, which isn't nothing. A million of anything is a lot. But then, when the political scandal started to break, people came for them but stayed for the content. And that's been really useful. Yeah, and it's not that surprising. Well, you know, because of what you do: there's a great hunger for information that is practical and useful, and that helps people find meaning in their lives and orient themselves. There's a great hunger for that. Most of my lectures were derived from solid psychology, some of it experimental, some of it biological, some of it from the domains of neuroscience, a lot of it from great clinicians. It's not surprising that people find it helpful, because great clinicians were great because they were really helpful. And so to distill that and offer it to people in a digestible form, to have that have a good effect on them, well, that's what you'd expect. That's what the whole discipline is about. That's been great. These public lectures that I've been doing—I think I've done 50 of them in about 45 different cities, now, in about three months. The average theater size is between 2,500 and 3,000 people, and they're unbelievably positive events. People come there, and we talk mostly about the political spectrum, and why there's room for voices on the left and why there's room for voices on the right, and where the parameters of that should be—because both of those can descend into extremism, and that's not good—and the role of individual responsibility and individual sovereignty, and the necessity for people to develop a vision—the sorts of things that we already talked about. Virtually everyone that's coming there, they're not coming for political reasons, even though that's the story you hear from the more ideologically possessed journalist types: because they see the world that way, they couldn't imagine anything else could possibly be happening. But the people who are coming to these lectures are coming because they're doing everything they possibly can to make their lives better, and it's lovely to talk to people like that. It is. It's great. It's literally great. Right, exactly! Exactly. Yeah, you bet. I'll do my best to be brief. Well, I'm… What's my purpose… What am I aiming at… Well, I did a series of biblical lectures last year. I did 15 lectures on Genesis. I'm going to continue doing that. In November, I'm going to start with the Exodus stories. What I'd like to do over the next 15 years is make my way through the whole corpus of biblical writings, so that's one major goal. I want to write another book. I've written half of it already, which will be a followup to 12 Rules, because I had actually laid out on a site called Quora 40 rules. And so I'll do that, and write another couple of books, I suspect, over the next few years. The touring, I'm going to continue. I have 10 cities coming up in Canada, and another 20 in the US, and then 12 in Europe. I'm going to go to Australia in February, and then back to Europe, I think, in April. So there's lots of touring on the horizon. It's for the reasons I've already described. The lectures differ every night, although there's themes that constantly emerge; and I'm using those as an opportunity to have a detailed and engaged discussion with the audience about how we might proceed forward, individually and collectively, so that we can make things consciously better, and why that's associated with necessary meaning, and why that's a moral obligation. So it's a dialog about responsibilities, and not rights. Rights are only important insofar as they set up the space for you to shoulder your proper responsibility. As a sovereign citizen, you have the responsibility for the integrity of the state resting on your shoulders. It's something that, if you don't take seriously, then the state shakes, and that's not good. So I'm trying to convey that to people. It's like, there's actually something that you need to do. You need to take care of yourself; you need to take care of your family; you need to take care of your community; and, if you don't do that, there will be hell to pay; and it's on each of us. It's hard for people to grasp that. Well, they don't want to, first of all—maybe because they don't want the responsibility. Then they don't get any meaning, then they suffer, then they get bitter. That's not good. So it's like, which of these are you going to pick? But it's also salutary to people, because it's useful for everyone to know that, if you don't live up to your potential, you leave a hole in the fabric of Being, and it's filled by something approximating hell. And, unless that's what you want, then you shouldn't be doing it. It's perfectly possible to have a serious discussion with 3,000 people about this, and they are right on board with it, all the way. That's really something amazing to behold. One of the things I've realized is, although these new technologies—the technologies you're using—enable these long-form discussions, it turns out people are smarter than we thought. TV narrowed it. It's like, 30 seconds! Say your complicated thing in 30 seconds. But you can't. So we were viewing the population through this narrow window, and everyone looked kind of stupid. It's like, now the window's fully open. It's like, oh, look at that! You people like 40-hour Netflix specials that are incredibly complex, and you like 3-hour Joe Rogan discussions that are complicated. You'll follow the whole thing. It's like, oh, good. We're smarter than we thought. Thank God for that, because we'd better be. So that's where I'm aiming at in the future. Oh! SelfAuthoring. com, and I put up a code, which is GREATNESS. You get 20 per cent off the full suite—two for one, so you can give the suite to your friends, too. Yup. I would say to everyone, if you're going to try this exercise, which I would recommend, do it over a few days, and don't do it perfectly. Just do it. Get it done. Do a bad first draft, which is an important principle in life: a bad first draft is a great thing to have. For you university students out there, the Future Authoring Program decreases your probability of dropout—if you're in a college program, university program—by somewhere between 25 and 50 per cent, especially if you're kind of aimless. If you've already got a plan and you're implementing it, and you've got a good direction, it's not as helpful, because you're already halfway there. But if you're kind of lost, and you do this, it will help you not only establish your goals but stick with them. It really helps. We've done three very detailed, published, peer-reviewed studies showing that this really works. And it doesn't hurt you, either. That's the other thing. Don't say things that make you weak. Lift your eyes above the horizon and aim at the highest star that you can contemplate. What's the third one… Put your family in order. Yeah. Well, greatness is what reveals itself when you attempt to carefully articulate and live out what you believe to be true. It just happens, because there isn't anything more powerful than truth. That's the antidote to suffering: truth. It's a strange thing, because you think, well, yeah. It produces a lot of suffering, too. It's like, yeah, in the short term. 